                     Chapter 1, Part III: Proofs



With Question/Answer Animations
Summary
 Valid Arguments and Rules of Inference
 Proof Methods
 Proof Strategies
Section 1.6
Section Summary
 Valid Arguments
 Inference Rules for Propositional Logic
 Using Rules of Inference to Build Arguments
 Rules of Inference for Quantified Statements
 Building Arguments for Quantified Statements
Revisiting the Socrates Example
 We have the two premises:
    “All men are mortal.”
    “Socrates is a man.”
 And the conclusion:
    “Socrates is mortal.”
 How do we get the conclusion from the premises?
The Argument
 We can express the premises (above the line) and the
  conclusion (below the line) in predicate logic as an
  argument:




 We will see shortly that this is a valid argument.
Valid Arguments
        We will show how to construct valid arguments in
         two stages; first for propositional logic and then for
         predicate logic. The rules of inference are the
         essential building block in the construction of valid
         arguments.
    1.     Propositional Logic
          Inference Rules
    2.     Predicate Logic
          Inference rules for propositional logic plus additional inference
               rules to handle variables and quantifiers.
Arguments in Propositional Logic
 A argument in propositional logic is a sequence of propositions.
  All but the final proposition are called premises. The last
  statement is the conclusion.
 The argument is valid if the premises imply the conclusion. An
  argument form is an argument that is valid no matter what
  propositions are substituted into its propositional variables.
 If the premises are p1 ,p2, …,pn and the conclusion is q then
     (p1 ∧ p2 ∧ … ∧ pn ) → q is a tautology.
 Inference rules are all argument simple argument forms that will
  be used to construct more complex argument forms.
Rules of Inference for Propositional
Logic: Modus Ponens
                      Corresponding Tautology:
                         (p ∧ (p →q)) → q




          Example:
          Let p be “It is snowing.”
          Let q be “I will study discrete math.”

          “If it is snowing, then I will study discrete math.”
          “It is snowing.”

          “Therefore , I will study discrete math.”
Rules of Inference for Propositional Logic:
Modus Tollens
                            Corresponding Tautology:
                               (¬p∧(p →q))→¬q




        Example:
        Let p be “it is snowing.”
        Let q be “I will study discrete math.”

        “If it is snowing, then I will study discrete math.”
        “I will not study discrete math.”

        “Therefore , it is not snowing.”
Hypothetical Syllogism
                          Corresponding Tautology:
                          ((p →q) ∧ (q→r))→(p→ r)




        Example:
        Let p be “it snows.”
        Let q be “I will study discrete math.”
        Let r be “I will get an A.”

        “If it snows, then I will study discrete math.”
        “If I study discrete math, I will get an A.”

        “Therefore , If it snows, I will get an A.”
Disjunctive Syllogism
                         Corresponding Tautology:
                         (¬p∧(p ∨q))→q



       Example:
       Let p be “I will study discrete math.”
       Let q be “I will study English literature.”

       “I will study discrete math or I will study English literature.”
       “I will not study discrete math.”

       “Therefore , I will study English literature.”
Addition
                             Corresponding Tautology:
                                  p →(p ∨q)



           Example:
           Let p be “I will study discrete math.”
           Let q be “I will visit Las Vegas.”

           “I will study discrete math.”

           “Therefore, I will study discrete math or I will visit
           Las Vegas.”
Simplification

                              Corresponding Tautology:
                                  (p∧q) →p



       Example:
       Let p be “I will study discrete math.”
       Let q be “I will study English literature.”

       “I will study discrete math and English literature”

       “Therefore, I will study discrete math.”
Conjunction
                                  Corresponding Tautology:
                                  ((p) ∧ (q)) →(p ∧ q)



       Example:
       Let p be “I will study discrete math.”
       Let q be “I will study English literature.”


       “I will study discrete math.”
       “I will study English literature.”

       “Therefore, I will study discrete math and I will study
       English literature.”
Resolution                      Resolution plays an important role
                                in AI and is used in Prolog.


                            Corresponding Tautology:
                            ((¬p ∨ r ) ∧ (p ∨ q)) →(q ∨ r)



     Example:
     Let p be “I will study discrete math.”
     Let r be “I will study English literature.”
     Let q be “I will study databases.”

     “I will not study discrete math or I will study English literature.”
     “I will study discrete math or I will study databases.”

     “Therefore, I will study databases or I will English literature.”
Using the Rules of Inference to
Build Valid Arguments
 A valid argument is a sequence of statements. Each statement is
  either a premise or follows from previous statements by rules of
  inference. The last statement is called conclusion.
 A valid argument takes the following form:
                     S1
                     S2
                    .
                    .
                    .
                   Sn

                   C
Valid Arguments
Example 1: From the single proposition

 Show that q is a conclusion.
Solution:
Valid Arguments
Example 2:
 With these hypotheses:
    “It is not sunny this afternoon and it is colder than yesterday.”
    “We will go swimming only if it is sunny.”
    “If we do not go swimming, then we will take a canoe trip.”
    “If we take a canoe trip, then we will be home by sunset.”
 Using the inference rules, construct a valid argument for the conclusion:
    “We will be home by sunset.”
Solution:
1.   Choose propositional variables:
    p : “It is sunny this afternoon.” r : “We will go swimming.” t : “We will be home by sunset.”
    q : “It is colder than yesterday.” s : “We will take a canoe trip.”
2. Translation into propositional logic:




                                                      Continued on next slide 
Valid Arguments
 3. Construct the Valid Argument
Handling Quantified Statements
 Valid arguments for quantified statements are a
  sequence of statements. Each statement is either a
  premise or follows from previous statements by rules
  of inference which include:
    Rules of Inference for Propositional Logic
    Rules of Inference for Quantified Statements
 The rules of inference for quantified statements are
  introduced in the next several slides.
Universal Instantiation (UI)



     Example:

     Our domain consists of all dogs and Fido is a dog.

     “All dogs are cuddly.”

     “Therefore, Fido is cuddly.”
Universal Generalization (UG)




        Used often implicitly in Mathematical Proofs.
Existential Instantiation (EI)



     Example:

     “There is someone who got an A in the course.”
     “Let’s call her a and say that a got an A”
Existential Generalization (EG)



     Example:

     “Michelle got an A in the class.”
     “Therefore, someone got an A in the class.”
Using Rules of Inference
Example 1: Using the rules of inference, construct a valid
  argument to show that
   “John Smith has two legs”
  is a consequence of the premises:
   “Every man has two legs.” “John Smith is a man.”
Solution: Let M(x) denote “x is a man” and L(x) “ x has two legs”
  and let John Smith be a member of the domain.
   Valid Argument:
Using Rules of Inference
 Example 2: Use the rules of inference to construct a valid argument
  showing that the conclusion
   “Someone who passed the first exam has not read the book.”
 follows from the premises
   “A student in this class has not read the book.”
   “Everyone in this class passed the first exam.”
 Solution: Let C(x) denote “x is in this class,” B(x) denote “ x has read
  the book,” and P(x) denote “x passed the first exam.”
    First we translate the
    premises and conclusion
    into symbolic form.




            Continued on next slide 
Using Rules of Inference
 Valid Argument:
Returning to the Socrates Example
Solution for Socrates Example
 Valid Argument
Universal Modus Ponens
    Universal Modus Ponens combines universal
    instantiation and modus ponens into one rule.




    This rule could be used in the Socrates example.
Section 1.7
Section Summary
 Mathematical Proofs
 Forms of Theorems
 Direct Proofs
 Indirect Proofs
    Proof of the Contrapositive
    Proof by Contradiction
Section Summary
 Proofs of Mathematical Statements
 Mathematical proofs are, in a sense, the
  only true knowledge we have.
 They provide us with a guarantee as well as
  an explanation.
 Mathematical proofs are necessary in Computing:
  • You must always (try to) prove that your
    algorithm:
   o terminates ,
   o is sound, complete, optimal, and
   o finds optimal solution.
 Definitions
 A theorem is a valid logical assertion which can be
  proved.
 An axiom is a statement which is given to be true.
 A lemma is a ‘pre-theorem’ or a result useful within the
  proof of a theorem.
 A conjecture is a statement whose truth value is
  unknown (guess) .
 A corollary is a ‘post-theorem’ or a result which
  follows directly from a theorem.
 A proof is a sequence of statements that
  form an argument.
Again …
Theorem: the main result that we want to prove.

Lemma: intermediate result used in theorem
proof.
Corollary: immediate consequence of
theorem.
Axiom: basic
truth.
Conjecture: something to be
proven.
Proof: is a valid argument that
establishes        the truth of a theorem.
                                             4
                       1/30/2026
Forms of Theorems
 Many theorems assert that a property holds for all elements
  in a domain, such as the integers, the real numbers, or
  some of the discrete structures that we will study in this
  class.
 Often the universal quantifier (needed for a precise
  statement of a theorem) is omitted by standard
  mathematical convention.
  For example, the statement:
    “If x > y, where x and y are positive real numbers, then x2 > y2 ”
 really means
    “For all positive real numbers x and y, if x > y, then x2 > y2 .”
Proving Theorems
 Many theorems have the form:


 To prove them, we show that where c is an arbitrary
  element of the domain,
 By universal generalization the truth of the original
  formula follows.
 So, we must prove something of the form:
Proving Conditional Statements: p → q
 Trivial Proof: If we know q is true, then
      p → q is true as well.

“If it is raining then 1=1.”

 Vacuous Proof: If we know p is false then
       p → q is true as well.
“If I am both rich and poor then 2 + 2 = 5.”

[ Even though these examples seem silly, both trivial and vacuous
  proofs are often used in mathematical induction, as we will see
  in Chapter 5) ]
Even and Odd Integers
 Definition: The integer n is even if there exists an
 integer k such that n = 2k, and n is odd if there exists
 an integer k, such that n = 2k + 1. Note that every
 integer is either even or odd and no integer is both
 even and odd.



 We will need this basic fact about the integers in some
 of the example proofs to follow. We will learn more
 about the integers in Chapter 4.
Proving Conditional Statements: p → q
 Direct Proof: Assume that p is true. Use rules of inference,
 axioms, and logical equivalences to show that q must also
 be true.
 Example: Give a direct proof of the theorem “If n is an odd
 integer, then n2 is odd.”
 Solution: Assume that n is odd. Then n = 2k + 1 for an
 integer k. Squaring both sides of the equation, we get:
 n2 = (2k + 1)2 = 4k2 + 4k +1 = 2(2k2 + 2k) + 1= 2r + 1,
  where r = 2k2 + 2k , an integer.
 We have proved that if n is an odd integer, then n2 is an
 odd integer.
             ( marks the end of the proof. Sometimes QED is
             used instead. )
Example




  QED= Latin word for “quod erat demonstrandum” meaning
  “that which was to be demonstrated.”
Proving Conditional Statements: p → q
 Definition: The real number r is rational if there exist
 integers p and q where q≠0 such that r = p/q
 Example: Prove that the sum of two rational numbers
 is rational.
 Solution: Assume r and s are two rational numbers.
 Then there must be integers p, q and also t, u such
 that

                                      where v = pu + qt
                                            w = qu ≠ 0
 Thus the sum is rational.
Proving Conditional Statements: p → q
Proving Conditional Statements: p → q
 Example: Prove that for an integer n, if n2 is odd, then n is
 odd.
 Solution: Use proof by contraposition. Assume n is even
 (i.e., not odd). Therefore, there exists an integer k such
 that n = 2k. Hence,
         n2 = 4k2 = 2 (2k2)
 and n2 is even(i.e., not odd).
 We have shown that if n is an even integer, then n2 is even.
 Therefore by contraposition, for an integer n, if n2 is odd,
 then n is odd.
Proving Conditional Statements: p → q
 Proof by Contradiction: (AKA reductio ad absurdum).
 To prove p, assume ¬p and derive a contradiction such as
 p ∧ ¬p. (an indirect form of proof). Since we have shown
 that ¬p →F is true , it follows that the contrapositive T→p
 also holds.
 Example: Prove that if you pick 22 days from the calendar,
 at least 4 must fall on the same day of the week.
 Solution: Assume that no more than 3 of the 22 days fall
 on the same day of the week. Because there are 7 days of
 the week, we could only have picked 21 days. This
 contradicts the assumption that we have picked 22 days.
Example 3 (cont …)
 Since a2=2 (b2), then a2 is even, therefore, a is even,
  then:
  2b2 = (2c)2, for some integer c
  2b2=4c2, so b2=2c2
 Thus, b is even too.
 If a and b are even, then they have at least one common
  factor (2), so the assumption r is contradicted:
                  p  (r  r)

 Therefore, ¬p is false, p is true,
      “√2 is irrational is true”
 QED


                                                      32
                         1/30/2026
Theorem:      2 is irrational P            Agai
                                           n
Proof: (proof by contradiction P  (r  r )   )

P : Assume 2 is rational
                     m
                  2
                     n
 r:     m and n have no common
         divisor greater than 1

 Therefore:      P  r
                       1/30/2026                    50
      2
  m
2 2               m 2  2n 2                   m  2k1 (m is even)
  n
                         n  2k1
                           2                2
2n  m  4k1                                        n  2k2 (n is even)
  2       2    2




              m 2k1
      r :                common divisor is 2
              n 2k 2


      Therefore:      P  r

                                1/30/2026                             51
Therefore:


 P  r
 P  r
  (P  r )  (P  r ) Conjunction
   P  ( r  r )
             contradiction


                  1/30/2026        52
Therefore:


             P  ( r  r )
             ( r  r )
              (P) Modus Tollens
             P

                               End of proof
                   1/30/2026                  53
Proof by Contradiction
 A preview of Chapter 4.
  Example: Prove that there is no largest prime number.
  Solution: Assume that there is a largest prime
  number. Call it pn. Hence, we can list all the primes
  2,3,.., pn. Form

 None of the prime numbers on the list divides r.
 Therefore, by a theorem in Chapter 4, either r is prime
 or there is a smaller prime that divides r. This
 contradicts the assumption that there is a largest
 prime. Therefore, there is no largest prime.
Vacuous Proofs
 Consider an implication: p  q
 If it can be shown that: p is false, then the
  implication is always true.
  • By definition of an implication ( if p=F,
   then    p q is true, whatever q=T or q=F).

 Note that: you are showing that the
  hypothesis is false.
Vacuous Proofs
 Proving p  q
 Vacuous Proof: Prove p is true.
 If we know one of the hypotheses in p is false, then
  p  q is vacuously true.
       F  T and F  F are both true.
 Examples
    If I am both rich and poor, then hurricane Katrina was a mild
     breeze.
    Theorem: (For all n) If n is odd and even, then n2 = n + n.
     Proof:
     The statement “n is both odd and even” is necessarily false,
      since no number can be both odd and even.
      So, the theorem is vacuously true.
 Sometimes used to proof theorems using
  UNIVERSAL QUANTIFICATION.
Theorems that are Biconditional
Statements
 To prove a theorem that is a biconditional statement,
  that is, a statement of the form p ↔ q, we show that
  p → q and q →p are both true.
 Example: Prove the theorem: “If n is an integer, then n is
 odd if and only if n2 is odd.”
 Solution: We have already shown (previous slides) that
 both p →q and q →p. Therefore we can conclude p ↔ q.

 Sometimes iff is used as an abbreviation for “if an only if,” as in
       “If n is an integer, then n is odd iif n2 is odd.”
Example 5
Prove that: “if n=a*b, where a and b are positive integers, then
             a  √n or b  √n ”.
Proof:
    We assume that (a  √n or b  √n ) is false (q).

    (a  √n  b  √n )

    (a > √n  b > √n ) we multiply these to obtain

      ab > √n * √n.

    ab > n which a.b ≠ n, i.e, (p).

    QED

                            1/30/2026                         19
Trivial Proofs
 • Consider an implication: p  q
 • If it can be shown that q is true, then the
   implication is always true.
     – By definition of an implication (q=T then p  q
       is true whatever p=T or p=F).


 • Note that you are showing that the
   conclusion is true.


59                         1/30/2026
Trivial Proof Example
• Consider the statement:
  “If you are tall and are in CS 202, then you are
   a student”

• Since all people in CS 202 are students, the
  implication is true regardless if you are tall
  or not.



                     1/30/2026
   60
Trivial Proof
 Proving pq.
 Trivial proof: Prove q is true (Prove q by itself).
 If we know q is true, then pq is true.
 The assertion is trivially true independent of the truth value
  of p.
      F  T and T  T are both true.
   
 Examples
      “If it’s raining today, then the empty set is a subset of every set”.
     Theorem: (For integer n) If n is the sum of two prime numbers, then
       either n is odd or n is even.
       Proof:
          Any integer n is either odd or even.
         So, the conclusion of the implication is true,
         regardless of the truth of the hypothesis.
        Thus, the implication is true trivially.




         1/30/2026                                                        24
What is wrong with this?
 “Proof” that 1 = 2




   Solution: Step 5. a - b = 0 by the premise and
   division by 0 is undefined.
Section 1.8
Section Summary
 Proof by Cases
 Existence Proofs
    Constructive
    Nonconstructive
 Disproof by Counterexample
 Nonexistence Proofs
 Uniqueness Proofs
 Proof Strategies
 Proving Universally Quantified Assertions
 Open Problems
Without Loss of Generality
 Example: Show that if x and y are integers and both x∙y and x+y are even,
 then both x and y are even.
 Proof: Use a proof by contraposition. Suppose x and y are not both even.
 Then, one or both are odd. Without loss of generality, assume that x is odd.
 Then x = 2m + 1 for some integer k.
    Case 1: y is even. Then y = 2n for some integer n, so
    x + y = (2m + 1) + 2n = 2(m + n) + 1 is odd.
    Case 2: y is odd. Then y = 2n + 1 for some integer n, so
    x ∙ y = (2m + 1) (2n + 1) = 2(2m ∙ n +m + n) + 1 is odd.


 We only cover the case where x is odd because the case where y is odd is
 similar. The use phrase without loss of generality (WLOG) indicates this.
Existence Proofs                            Srinivasa Ramanujan
                                             (1887-1920)

 Proof of theorems of the form                  .
 Constructive existence proof:
    Find an explicit value of c, for which P(c) is true.
    Then             is true by Existential Generalization (EG).
  Example: Show that there is a positive integer that can be
  written as the sum of cubes of positive integers in two
  different ways:
  Proof:      1729 is such a number since
              1729 = 103 + 93 = 123 + 13

            Godfrey Harold Hardy
             (1877-1947)
Nonconstructive Existence Proofs
 In a nonconstructive existence proof, we assume no c
  exists which makes P(c) true and derive a
  contradiction.
  Example: Show that there exist irrational numbers x
  and y such that xy is rational.
  Proof: We know that √2 is irrational. Consider the
  number √2 √2 . If it is rational, we have two irrational
  numbers x and y with xy rational, namely x = √2
  and y = √2. But if √2 √2 is irrational,
  then we can let x = √2 √2 and y = √2 so that
  aaaaa xy = (√2 √2 )√2 = √2 (√2 √2) = √2 2 = 2.
Counterexamples
 Recall                         .
 To establish that             is true (or          is false)
  find a c such that P(c) is true or P(c) is false.
 In this case c is called a counterexample to the
  assertion           .
  Example: “Every positive integer is the sum of the
  squares of 3 integers.” The integer 7 is a
  counterexample. So the claim is false.
Uniqueness Proofs
 Some theorems asset the existence of a unique element with a
  particular property, !x P(x). The two parts of a uniqueness proof
  are
    Existence: We show that an element x with the property exists.
    Uniqueness: We show that if y≠x, then y does not have the property.
 Example: Show that if a and b are real numbers and a ≠0, then
 there is a unique real number r such that ar + b = 0.
 Solution:
   Existence: The real number r = −b/a is a solution of ar + b = 0
    because a(−b/a) + b = −b + b =0.
   Uniqueness: Suppose that s is a real number such that as + b = 0.
    Then ar + b = as + b, where r = −b/a. Subtracting b from both
    sides and dividing by a shows that r = s.
Proof Strategies for proving p → q
 Choose a method.
   1. First try a direct method of proof.
   2. If this does not work, try an indirect method (e.g., try to
      prove the contrapositive).
 For whichever method you are trying, choose a strategy.
   1. First try forward reasoning. Start with the axioms and
      known theorems and construct a sequence of steps that end
      in the conclusion. Start with p and prove q, or start with ¬q
      and prove ¬p.
   2. If this doesn’t work, try backward reasoning. When trying to
      prove q, find a statement p that we can prove with the
      property p → q.
Backward Reasoning
 Example: Suppose that two people play a game taking turns removing, 1, 2, or 3 stones at
  a time from a pile that begins with 15 stones. The person who removes the last stone wins
  the game. Show that the first player can win the game no matter what the second player
  does.

 Proof: Let n be the last step of the game.
   Step n: Player1 can win if the pile contains 1,2, or 3 stones.
   Step n-1: Player2 will have to leave such a pile if the pile that he/she is faced with has 4
      stones.
   Step n-2: Player1 can leave 4 stones when there are 5,6, or 7 stones left at the beginning of
      his/her turn.
   Step n-3: Player2 must leave such a pile, if there are 8 stones .
   Step n-4: Player1 has to have a pile with 9,10, or 11 stones to ensure that there are 8 left.
   Step n-5: Player2 needs to be faced with 12 stones to be forced to leave 9,10, or 11.
   Step n-6: Player1 can leave 12 stones by removing 3 stones.
 Now reasoning forward, the first player can ensure a win by removing 3 stones and leaving
 12.
Universally Quantified Assertions
 To prove theorems of the form          ,assume x is an
  arbitrary member of the domain and show that P(x)
  must be true. Using UG it follows that          .
  Example: An integer x is even if and only if x2 is even.
  Solution: The quantified assertion is
     x [x is even  x2 is even]
  We assume x is arbitrary.
  Recall that           is equivalent to
  So, we have two cases to consider. These are
  considered in turn.
               Continued on next slide 
Universally Quantified Assertions
Case 1. We show that if x is even then x2 is even using
 a direct proof (the only if part or necessity).
If x is even then x = 2k for some integer k.
Hence x2 = 4k2 = 2(2k2 ) which is even since it is an
 integer divisible by 2.
This completes the proof of case 1.




         Case 2 on next slide 
Universally Quantified Assertions
 Case 2. We show that if x2 is even then x must be even (the
 if part or sufficiency). We use a proof by contraposition.
 Assume x is not even and then show that x2 is not even.
 If x is not even then it must be odd. So, x = 2k + 1 for some
 k. Then x2 = (2k + 1)2 = 4k2 + 4k + 1 = 2(2k2 + 2k) + 1
  which is odd and hence not even. This completes the proof
 of case 2.
 Since x was arbitrary, the result follows by UG.
 Therefore we have shown that x is even if and only if x2 is
 even.
Proof and Disproof: Tilings
Example 1: Can we tile the standard checkerboard
  using dominos?
Solution: Yes! One example provides a constructive
  existence proof.



                         Two Dominoes



 The Standard Checkerboard              One Possible Solution
Tilings
  Example 2: Can we tile a checkerboard obtained by
  removing one of the four corner squares of a standard
  checkerboard?
  Solution:
 Our checkerboard has 64 − 1 = 63 squares.
 Since each domino has two squares, a board with a
  tiling must have an even number of squares.
 The number 63 is not even.
 We have a contradiction.
Tilings
 Example 3: Can we tile a board obtained by removing
 both the upper left and the lower right squares of a
 standard checkerboard?




      Nonstandard Checkerboard              Dominoes

                                 Continued on next slide 
Tilings
 Solution:
 There are 62 squares in this board.
 To tile it we need 31 dominos.
 Key fact: Each domino covers one black and one white
  square.
 Therefore the tiling covers 31 black squares and 31
  white squares.
 Our board has either 30 black squares and 32 white
  squares or 32 black squares and 30 white squares.
 Contradiction!
